

Dear Manager,

  I am writing to seek an opportunity with your team to create innovative 
products.

  My background is full stack development with large scale distributed systems.
I have solid experiences in distributed system architecture, development,
debugging, and optimization. I have worked on components from kernel driver,
TCP internal, sqlite engine, mobile apps, to full stack web apps and servers.
I have optimized systems on linux, Mysql, JVMs and node.js. Here is my one
line optimization that reduced 15% cpu usage in node.js.
    socket.setTimeout(timeout + 1000 * Math.floor(Math.random());

  I design by abstraction and code to interfaces. I am skilled at both
threading and event driven programming. I use JVM for cpu intensive apps,
node.js for IO intensive apps, and clojure for data processing, python for 
tooling. I use Metrics, graphite, logStash, ElasticSearch for monitoring.
  
  I embrace fully with functional programming. I use clojure, clojurescript,
datomic, core.async channel, cascalog, storm for service and data pipeline.
I use rabbitmq for scaling, and Redis, datomic, and MongoDB for data store.
My projects in github show my work of building entire system end to end.

    http://github.com/life0fun

  I can be  reached at life0fun@gmail.com or (650)346-0192
  
  Looking forward to  hearing from  you.
    
  Regards,
  haijin




      Haijin  Yan

  Full Stack Engineer, WalmartLabs.
  life0fun@gmail.com  (650)346-0192

Objective
  Seeking opportunity to build innovative and exciting products

Summary
  Experienced in system architecture, development, debug, and optimization.
  Experienced in full stack development from backend to frontend to mobile.
  Deep knowledge in kernel, driver, network, database, and distributed system.
  Excellent problem solving and analytic skills for system scaling.

Programming
  Proficient in Java, Javascript, Python, Clojure, C++, SQL, and scripting.
  Skilled in tools for dev, deploy, profiling, monitoring distributed systems. 
  Skilled in JVM, Node.js, Rabbitmq, Redis, Mysql, MongoDB clustering.
  Proficient in OO and functional abstraction and design patterns.
  familiar with real-time data processing with storm and elasticsearch.
  Deep understanding of TCP/IP implementations in Linux and BSD.

Experiences

3/2014 - present, WalmartLabs, San Bruno, CA.
- Item Recommendation Service
  worked on lauching walmart new site with item recommendation service on both
  FE and service side. On FE, responsible for recommendation views on various
  pages, collecting tracking beacons, support A/B tests configurations. On 
  service side, adding cache and metrics, webui server for publishing models, 
  and various devops tasks. supported holiday madness with 4.5k req/sec.

8/2012 - present, Locationlabs, Emeryville, CA
 - System team
  Designed and developed a push server to support persistent connections to 
  mobile phones for real time push using node.js and SPDY protocol from ground
  up, including build, deploy, monitoring and profiling, and HA, scalability
  test automation.

 - Scalability Team
  Helped scaling up our web app throughput 10x times to more than 5k req/s.
  deployed metrics, statsD, diamond, graphite, logstash, cubism to monitor 
  system. Optimized Mysql by tuning parameters with slow query analysis.
  Profiled and optimized JVM GC, hibernate and web app with Yourkit and 
  newRelic. coded tools to improve test automation and reporting.
 
 - Mobile Team
  Added lib for our app to use Verizon direct SMS and App VPN for data.


1/2005 - 8/2012, Motorola Mobility, Libertyville, IL

  4/2010 - 8/2012, Principle Engineer
   -Designed and implemented location service for SmartActions App,
    including location discovery, detection, streaming, and predicting.
   -Redesign, refactor, clean code to optimize performance and battery. 
   -Developto Android Platform Service Wrapper for Moto Android TDD.
   -Built location data pipeline with data collection, ETL and analysis.
   -Setup an internal social web site using reddit open source.
   -Setup a real-time twitter monitoring site to track product sentiment.
   -Prototyped mobile web apps with node.js, websocket, Redis, MongoDB.
    scaled out big data processing with MongoDB clustering and zeroMQ, etc.
    ex: youtube.com/watch?v=hzcHN-ofnJM location.no.de location.no.de/droid
   
  2/2009 - 3/2010, Senior Staff, Emerging Communication Group 
   -Led stability rack by solving critical Java exceptions, kernel panics,
    ANRs, segfaults, OOME, and database corruption issues.
    e.g. cursor window ashmem leak, tombstones, sqlite db corruption.
   -Supported Motorola Android Platform bring up and stabilization.

  8/2007 - 1/2009, Senior Staff, Multimedia Group
   -Resolved hot issues across various platforms and products, 
    e.g., cpu exceptions, watch dog panic, mem corruptions, leaks. 
   -Ported Adobe Mobile Client to RTOS and developed Flash extensions 
    to expose native c++ code to ActionScript client.
   -Stabilized, optimized, and shipped MediaFinder to millions phones.
   -Supported multimedia features and bug fixes on various products.
   -Designed and implemented ATT Napster MTP feature with Janus DRM. 

  1/2005 - 3/2006, Senior Software Engineer
   -Developed multimedia navigation and cataloging engine in RTOS platform.
    with Finite State Machine, multimedia parsing, sqlite db store.
   -Ported SQLite to RTOS, stabilized and optimized db engine.
   -Optimized MMCSD driver and FAT32 on RTOS by adding caches. 

9/2001 - 12/2004, Research Assistant, CS, Univ. of Georgia     
   -Ph.D research on the network support for energy-efficient wireless 
    communications. Research paper co-authored with Dr. Larry Peterson 
    published on IEEE Transaction on Mobile Computing.

6/2002 - 8/2004, System Programmer, Life Science, Univ. of Georgia
   -Developed a distributed computation system for Bio-informatics 
    software package SGXPRO in a Linux cluster with 64 nodes.
 
5/2001 - 8/2001. Summer Intern, WhyDataWorks Inc, Athens, GA. 
   -Developed a management information system for mobile data management
    using PHP and DB2 on Linux.

5/1998 - 8/2000, Project Manager, Mobile Data Dept, China Mobile, Sichuan. 
   -Built the Mobile Telecom Management Network(TMN) for Sichuan Mobile.
   -Led the SMS based new service development for Sichuan Mobile. 
   -Led the technology strategic planning for Sichuan Mobile 3G. 

8/1996 - 12/1997, Research assistant, CS Dept, UESTC,  
   -Developed device driver and tools for Creative Sound Card on a  
    POSIX complaint operating system for Chinese government.

Education
   Ph.D. Computer Science, minor in management, Jan 2005.
   The University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia
   Dissertation: Network Support for Energy-Efficient Wireless Communications.

   M.S. Computer Science, May 1998. 
   The University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu
   Thesis: Sound blaster device driver and multimedia mechanism for COSIX. 

   B.S. Electronic Mechanics, August 1995.
   The University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu

Patent
    Enhancements to discovering meaningful locations. (Pending)
    Methods and devices for identifying local area networks (Pending)

Selected Publications 
   Client-Centered, Energy-Efficient Wireless Communication on 802.11b Network.
   Haijin Yan, David Lowenthal, and Larry L. Peterson.
   IEEE Transaction on Mobile Computing, Vol 5, No.11, Nov, 2006

   Towards Cooperation Fairness in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks.  
   Haijin Yan and David K. Lowenthal.   
   The 6th IEEE Wireless Computing and Networking Conference, Mar, 2005.

   Client-Centered Energy Savings for Concurrent HTTP Connections.  
   Haijin Yan, Rupa Krishnan, and David K. Lowenthal. 
   14th ACM Workshop on Networks and Operating System Support for Digital 
   Audio and Video (NOSSDAV), June, 2004.
